my goal with this project was to
make five or ten really
beautiful pictures
essentially giving a voice to
these animals a visualforce and
it was this picture right here
that I think gets out the
essence of this migration
she is on them yellowstone was
created a hundred and forty-four
years ago it was created
originally to protect these
incredible geological wonders
The Geysers the canyons the
waterfalls the hot springs
but since then we've come to
value Yellowstone just as much
for its incredible ecology these
large mammals in particular the
Rome widely across the landscape
there now virtually synonymous
with the word Yellowstone
but at the same time a look back
at these ancient sites in the
Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem
suggest another important untold
story and that's what we're here
to talk to you about tonight
this right here is a drawing of
an elk made thousands of years
ago by Native Americans at a
site called legend rock south of
the town of cody wyoming
there's over 300 petroglyphs at
this site and most of which are
the who loved animals
the pronghorn to help the deer
the moves the sheep and some of
the tribes didn't call it
Yellowstone after the rocks they
actually call that elk river
after these hold animals they
knew something that has taken us
a long time to figure out and
it's these animals that Arthur
and I have been focusing on for
about about a decade for me this
journey started on the Great
Plains in South Dakota where I
grew up and it was those geese
right there that really pick my
interest in migration
fast forward to my early
twenties there's a pronghorn
migration that had just been
mapped there were over 400
pronghorn that removing about a
hundred miles from the upper
Green River Basin into Grand
Teton National Park
so of course i was interested in
I've got on my computer and
google it it's no problem horn
migration
I wanted to see what it look
like well it hadn't been
photographed
so I thought you know wow this
is this might be my chance to be
a photographer release to act
like a photographer and I
applied for a grant so I could
follow this migration make the
first photographs of it and I
was awarded three thousand bucks
and I was set so so for two
years I lived in the back of my
pickup and my goal was to show
the beauty of this migration
show people what it look like
what it was like to be a
migrating animal
I started to get some of the
first photographs of pronghorn
migration showing them in places
where they can't see far they
can't run fast this picture
right here is from mid-january
and they were stopped by deep
snow and it was around this time
that I'd realize that
well if I'm there the pronghorn
armed and I need to start using
camera traps and it was a way
for me to document it without
disturbing them
this migration corridor there's
evidence they've been doing this
for six thousand years then I
had to figure out exactly the
trails they were using you know
down to a couple feet so that
was that was backpacking
hundreds of miles trying to
figure out where i was going to
put my camera traps so i spent
most of my time
you know putting cameras at
river crossings in deep snow
that type of thing
this is a pronghorn book that
didn't make it for me migration
equals wildness and I think this
photograph gets at that
my goal with this project was to
make five or ten really
beautiful pictures
essentially giving a voice to
these animals of visual voice
and over the course of those two
years I've felt like I got that
done and it was this picture
right here that really open that
up for me
the shadow on the rock the
passing storm that entire two
years worth this single moment
in time
she is on the move and so during
that two years was realizing
that we are having an impact and
this needs to be documented
so the housing developments the
fences that are associated with
them they burn up energy every
time they
have to cross something like a
fence and some of them don't
make it this fence has been
retrofitted since that picture
was made this is a famous place
called trappers . in 2008 and
this is the most dangerous place
along this pronghorn migration
corridor there's over a hundred
collisions every year is a
dangerous place for both people
and for wildlife but in in 2012
the Wyoming Department of
Transportation completed the
first prong horn wildlife
overpass in this group of
pronghorn right here is the
first group to cross in 2012
you can see a hundred and twenty
pronghorn and then you can see
one mule deer right there that
thinks it's a problem or
and I'd like to think that i had
some small part in in getting
that done and that's really when
I started to believe in the
power of conservation
photography and luckily out of
the blue I get a call from horse
lawyer who is a researcher was
the first guy to study the
pronghorn migration corridor in
the late nineties and he called
me up and said Joe
I just made a discovery on these
mule deer i collared a small
group of mule deer he thought
they were resident dear into a
surprise
they actually moved a hundred
and fifty miles to the north
essentially linking southern
Wyoming to the Greater
Yellowstone Ecosystem this is an
incredible discovery said why
don't you come back and
photograph it
that was sure that and the thing
I realized with these deer is
that the pronghorn was just the
tip of the iceberg
there is so much more potential
in this world of migration and
of course it's longer than the
pronghorn corridor so of course
they're crossing highways over a
hundred fences and some of them
don't make it so during that
whole time I kept hearing about
this guy do an elk migration
work and and studying elk and
wolf interaction up and Cody
I heard that even the game
wardens in the Cody office were
calling him the elk hippie and
out of the blue he called me and
he said a code you want to do a
project on help migration and it
brought us to right here
ok so i'm sure most of you knows
but doesn't take much and why
I'm going to get called a hippie
I had never seen a wolf or an
elk
when I started this work i
actually took me a long time to
admit that because you know
showing up in Cody Wyoming and
saying i'm here to help with
your wolves and out but I never
seen them
not a good thing you tell them
that after you get the job
and so one of the things i
learned is why these animals
migrate and this is a very
important thing
why do they migrate is to get
fresh green grass grass is hard
to digest
you want the fresh green stuff
and it stays green longer up in
the high mountains and so this
is the only chart you will see
in this entire talk but it's a
very important one and what
you're seeing on the bottom on
the x axis is the number of days
as animals are off of the peak
green and so as you go to the
left
they get to be a batter and
there's a lot of fat involved
here we're going from ten
percent all the way up to twenty
percent body fat one of the
first things you notice is if
their resident and blue if they
don't migrate they don't get his
fat different migratory they get
fat and so what is that fat mean
it means cabs
it means productivity this is
what allows the wolf to recover
in the Greater Yellowstone this
is what sustains that creature
allows us to sustain the court
recovery of grizzly bears
wildlife watching and tourism
these migratory ungulates by
sustaining all this are a huge
part of that economy there is a
enormous economy for the
communities outside the Greater
Yellowstone when these animals
are out there of hunting whether
it be for meat or four trophies
and that feeds enormously it in
tens and tens of millions of
dollars annually into these
communities
so these migrations are really
important and so these these
barriers that Joe introduced you
to like these fences
these are things that constrain
the ability of these animals to
gain that fat and so that made
me want to know about it
my equivalent of wanting to
google the program
we're not finding pictures was
wanting to see a map of it and
there wasn't one that used the
new technology and so my part of
this work was to set about doing
that and and so we want to show
you the Cody heard and take you
on that journey that we took to
understand and document this
migration
this is a population about 6,000
elk winners an enormous groups
out on the foothills and often
on this private lands and these
private lands are managed for
many different uses as well as
adjacent public lands and so
there are some conflicts here
for these wild life whether it
be a risk of disease that they
pose to livestock or
developments like residential
and energy developments that
impact the habitats of these
wintering animals
so as we move from the ranches
up into the mountains 12,000
feet peaks and these elk are
going over the top of them
so my job is to show what that
looks like
so here's one of our first
flights actually this from a
helicopter just showing how
truly incredible that these elk
are these Mountain Elk this is
it 11,500 feet and you can see
the lead cow in this group of 12
is trying to figure out where
they took a wrong turn
so right here in the middle
there's a telc that just gives
you an idea of the scale of some
of the mountains that these elk
are going on
so my job is to get a camera
within two feet of those elk
so here we are going to walk on
that same path and try to figure
out where these trails really
are as you can see in this video
there's actually a cut in the
rock that these elk of cut over
the thousands of years they've
been on this trail
I work on these animals with
these collars from a distance
a lot of the time and one of the
things i wanted to do just
experienced the same migration
myself and so that's what we did
so showing these elk on his high
mountain passes
the only problem is there's a
lot of bears on these high
mountain passes as well so a lot
of my work was repairing cameras
that were pushed down and
demolished by bear cubs like
these guys
so here's Arthur and I at that
last spot out cap it's only a
couple weeks old and then she
shows up
that's not a good thing
but I mean with months of work
and years of work on this
project i started to get some
some video footage that actually
captured you know the numbers
that these elk are moving in
I mean this is hot these are
hundreds of help moving over one
past together
this is almost 12,000 feet so as
we move from the mountain passes
down to the river crossing the
South Fork of this show any
River that place i spent a lot
of time at this is a river
that's raging with snow melt
super cold water
yeah
so the next part of this
migration the challenge is to
get up into the high country
where these Oaks been the summer
and it's very distant and hard
to get to and so you cannot do
this without people who know
this landscape intimately and
have been in it since they were
kids
this is the place where the snow
and the rain and the Sun come
together to make the grass that
feeds this creature and feeds
all this abundance and so that's
what we encounter and spend time
with up and in that high country
is this great big summering
groups of ELQ what I set out to
do in the course of this work
was to create this map
fuller picture of the elk
migrations of the Greater
Yellowstone and i want to show
you the completed product from
that effort all these herds
making that movement from winter
inches in outlying areas of the
system up into the heart of it
so what I see here is the veins
and arteries of this landscape
what you can imagine as you
think of these animals moving in
and out
then back out year after year is
the pulse of this landscape
so for me as a photographer how
do you show that pulse or that
heartbeat of a system in a
photograph
I found this spot early in 2014
this like 10-foot by 10-foot
chunk of dirt
I knew all the out cross through
and I I worked hard in 2014 and
went back in 2015 and was gifted
with an amazing picture it in
that one picture took
375 miles on horseback 240 days
that that camera is out there
and I got one split second this
picture right here that I think
gets out the essence of this
migration that calf is learning
the migration for the first time
it's only a couple weeks old and
I feel like this picture is
worth this entire project for me
yeah